[WIP] Begin KEP for fine-grained authz (#3617)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/3617-fine-grained-authz/README.md

  * .metadata.labels (parameterized by key)
  * .metadata.annotations (parameterized by key)
  * .metadata.finalizers (parameterized by prefix)
  * .metadata.liens (doesn't exist yet; will be parameterized)
  * .metadata.ownerReferences (maybe)
* .status
  * .status.conditions (many objects but not all; parameterized by specific type)
* .spec
  * .spec.replicas (multiple objects)
  * .spec.nodeName (pod only)
  * .spec.schedulePaused (pod only; doesn't exist yet)

### Design

We will describe a system of additional authorization checks apiserver will
perform on mutating requests. First we need to explain some background and state
the rest of the requirements, otherwise the design offered will seem too
complex.

#### Authorization System Background and Requirements

On start-up, apiserver constructs an "authorizor" which is an object that
understands how to correctly make authorization checks (henceforth "authz
checks"). Users / cluster administrators can configure these checks to be done
in a number of different ways. RBAC is the most obvious choice, since it is
provided along with Kubernetes, but many clusters are integrated with external
authz systems (using plugins).

> People offering reasonably dangerous extenstions / new fields need assurances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People offering reasonably dangerous extensions / new fields need assurances
```

that these things can be secured in any environment, and that they can offer

> instructions on doing so mostly independantly of the backend authz system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instructions on doing so mostly independently of the backend authz system
```

(because they may not even be able to identify all implementations).

Therefore, __modifying a single authz system can't solve the problem__.

An authz check can be thought of as sending structured data to an opaque system

> which answers yes or no. Essentially we can't change things about the system

Reviewer 2: yes, no, or no opinion.  I think the distinction between no and no opinion is significant.

Author: I think that matters for individual authorizors but not really for the authz stack as a whole, which eventually either admits or rejects.

Author: clarified

("opaque") because the system could comprise any number of implementations, many
not even open-source. The data we can give the system includes:

(TODO: I'm sure sig auth will want to correct my wording here)

* The resource type (group, version, resource)

> * The object's locator (namespace if any, name, uid)

Reviewer 2: UID is not provided.

Author: removed

> * The actor's identity (username, group)

Reviewer 2: user.Extra and user.UID are provided.  See user.Info.

Author: added

> * The verb...

Reviewer 2: verb is a free-form string, the kube-apiserver has a few well-known verbs like update.

Author: Added words

the requirements yet, keep reading!)

#### API Server Additional Plumbing and Checks

Currently apiserver performs the authz check before descending into any detailed
logic for mutating operations. This means that when it is doing the authz check,
it knows the *object* that is being changed, but nothing about *which fields*
are changing.

We will introduce a new permission, "granular". This permission
means that although the caller doesn't have generic update permissions, it may
still change some fields if it has the specific permissions required.

API Server already maintains schema information for all resource types. This
will be watched to also maintain field <-> permission mappings.

Now we can describe the modifications to API Server:

On any mutating call,

1. Check the "PUT" / "PATCH" / "CREATE" permission. If the actor has this,
   proceed to step 3.
2. Otherwise, check the "granular" permission. If yes, place a
   marker in the request context and proceed to step 3, otherwise, fail the
   request with a forbidden error.
3. Compute the change (patch logic, SSA logic, defaulting etc). Compute a list
   of fields which changed. (SSA logic makes this easy.)

> 4. Pre- or post- (DECISION NEEDED) webhooks, check the list of fields:

Reviewer: Probably post-mutating webhooks, no? I guess you could also run it both before and after.

Author: Kind of a trade off -- doing it post webhook is safer in terms of what gets committed but breaks webhooks that e.g. look at nodeName and keep a label up to date. pre-webhook is safer in terms of not exposing side-effect-having webhooks to malicious payloads.

Reviewer 2: I prefer post-mutating webhooks as well.  I'd like to check on the actual object being stored.

5. If the marker is present, every field needs to be covered by some permission.
   Check permissions, stop and fail if some field is not covered. (The order is
   described below.)
6. Otherwise (no marker) ONLY fields having "excluded" permissions need to be
   checked; if such fields are modified, check their permissions as in step 5.
7. If all checks pass, perform the rest of the needed operation.
8. If any check fails, fail the request. The error message will not list ALL
   permissions that are lacked, because it is possible to craft a request that
   requires a large number of authz requests.

When fine-grained field permissions need to be checked, they will be checked
in the order of most general to most specific. When we describe the
representation in the schema it will be clear what that means. The reason for
this is that multiple fields can be covered by a more general permission,

> greatly reducing the number of checks needed in the worst case (as long as the

Reviewer 2: Should we expand the authorization interface to have a slice option to pass more than one to evaluate a time?  We could expand the webhook using another version and non-participating webhooks could be shimmed to answer one at a time in parallel

Reviewer 3: that's funny, I literally had that thought this morning

Reviewer 3: that would already be nice for impersonation

Author: I have no objection to that but it sounds like an optimization that can be done whether or not the KEP goes through.

Reviewer 2: > I have no objection to that but it sounds like an optimization that can be done whether or not the KEP goes through.

I'm not completely sure of that.  There are two "obvious" ways to handle parameterization of something like label values.  

1. One way is to describe in the schema a manner in which shrink the keyspace (you've done this).
2.  Another way is to send all the label keys to the authorizer as distinct verbs and let the authorizer decide how best to let a user/cluster-admin express rules.

I think if we have a bulk authorization interface, it becomes more practical to lookup every key at once.

Author: Sorry it says you sent this 7 days ago but this is the first I saw it -- if you look at my comment [here](https://github.com/lavalamp/enhancements/pull/7#discussion_r1001229920) I think my current plan doesn't require a bulk lookup. My backup plan also doesn't require a bulk lookup.

Author: The latest revision doesn't require bulk lookup, either.

general to most specific, so that a single general permission can let it avoid
checking many specific permissions.

#### Pod's nodeName

Given where this appears in Pod, this permission will only be checked for pods
if the agent doesn't have the "specification" permission.

This must be set on the field declaration, since nodeName is a string and not a
struct:

```go
  ...
  // +permission-verb:"nodeAssignment"
  NodeName string
  ...
```

On CRDs schemas (pod is not a CRD, but if a CRD has a field that is the same
concept, you could add to that field this):

```
"x-kubernetes-permission-verb": "nodeAssignment"
```

The authz system will see the verb "granular:nodeAssignment".

##### Everything in metadata

Configured the same as everything in spec, but the verb will be (CHOICE NEEDED)
"metadata" or "objectmeta".

#### All Labels

This permission will only be checked if the agent doesn't have the everything in
metadata permission.

This is set on the field declaration, since it is a map and we are granting
permission on any item in the map.

```go
  ...
  // +permission-verb:"labels"
  Labels map[string]string
  ...
```

The authz system will see the verb "granular:labels".

> #### Specific Labels

Author: @apelisse can you look at this section and see if you can think of a better system? (you may need to read some prior sections to understand this)

This permission will only be checked if the agent has neither the general
metadata permission nor the "granular:labels" permission.

This field is currently in ObjectMeta, declared like this:

```go
	...
	// Map of string keys and values that can be used to organize and categorize
	// (scope and select) objects. May match selectors of replication controllers
	// and services.
	// More info: http://kubernetes.io/docs/user-guide/labels
	// +optional
	Labels map[string]string `json:"labels,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,11,rep,name=labels"`
	...
```

This is very inconvenient as it leaves only one place to declare things in the
schema. Note that we must not make any incompatible changes to the serialization
of this type. This is one way to make this work:

```go
	...
	Labels map[LabelKey]LabelValue `json:"labels,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,11,rep,name=labels"`
	...
}
.
.
.

> // LabelKey is a value in a label; it is a string.

Author: ```suggestion
// LabelKey is a key for a label; it is a string.
```

9. If any check fails, fail the request. The error message will not list ALL
   permissions that are lacked, because it is possible to craft a request that
   requires a large number of authz requests.

When fine-grained field permissions need to be checked, they will be checked
in the order of most general to most specific. When we describe the
representation in the schema it will be clear what that means. The reason for
this is that multiple fields can be covered by a more general permission,
greatly reducing the number of checks needed in the worst case (as long as the
system administrator has made use of the general permission).

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

This is a complex design. See the alternatives for why we propose it anyway.

### Risks and Mitigations

This design avoids the "grant an overly broad permission and then restrict it
later" pattern, which has undesirable failure / misconfiguration patterns.

This design is written to have no impact on existing cluster users for existing
fields.

A risk is that it would be possible to configure permissions which result in a
large number of authz checks. Specifically CRD authors could craft a CRD with

> many checks required to do anything.

Reviewer 4: We [restrict resource use by CRDs' validation functions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#resource-use-by-validation-functions). Perhaps a similar restriction could apply here?

Reviewer 4: Oops, feedback is too early. Sorry about that.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Add fine-grained authorization checks to mutating kubernetes api calls.

"fine-grained" means giving the ability to certain actors (users, groups,
controllers, etc) to edit only particular fields, instead of entire objects.

> Additionally, it involves adding the ability to restrict existing board

Reviewer 5: spelling? board -> broad

Until now we have used subresources to solve this problem, but we have realized
that they have a number of problems (see alternative design section) and it is
best not to add additional uses of that pattern.

### Goals

* Add a mechanism for granting certain users generic ability to set
  (write/update) certain fields, without granting them the ability to set other
  fields in objects.
* Add a mechanism for restricting certain fields from users otherwise having
  general mutating permissions on an object type.

### Non-Goals

* Changing permissions for existing fields. This feature should have no
  observable changes unless configured by administrators.

## Proposal

Let's introduce the user stories before the design:

### User Stories

#### Story 1

I wish to restrict an operator "supersafe" to write only:

* labels with keys beginning with "super.safe.com/"
* annotations with keys beginning with "super.safe.com/"
* finalizers with the prefix "super.safe.com/"
* conditions with the type "SuperSafe"

#### Story 2

I'm adding a new field to pod.spec, "triggerSelfDestructOnSecurityBreach".
Ordinary users must not be able to set this to true. Only admins may set it to
true.

> #### List of known fields wanting these features

Reviewer 6: We have also had CVEs in the past which would have been better solved by a field-level mechanism, I think, such as `Service.spec.externalIPs`

  should not. Otherwise it will be extremely laborious to configure the system
  to ensure permissions don't change when objects are accessed via different
  versions.
* Fields representing the same concept in *different* objects should share the
  *same* permission. The authz system already has a spot for resource type,
  which can be specific or wildcard based. We should not encode resource type
  into the verb also.
* Because the permissions are distinct from fields, we should do our best to
  make the permissions (verb strings) not confusable for field names or paths.

The exact permissions are going to be a shared responsibility between extension
authors and in-tree Kubernetes developers, since anyone can author a CRD.

As part of this KEP, we will update the schemas to supply permission verbs for
the fields listed above. We will document the patterns used so that extension
authors can make their own permission verbs which won't conflict with each other
or with in-tree verbs. We may not know exactly what the best practices are until
we have an alpha or beta behind us, hence we're not ready to specify that in
this KEP yet.

> (The exact permission system will be described below because we're not done with

Reviewer 6: I just want to say that I am only this far in, and already I think it's a great KEP.

the requirements yet, keep reading!)

> #### Uncovered verbs

Author: @deads2k I think moving this concept out of the schema gets you what you want.

There's one more piece of information we need to satisfy our second goal, and it
can't go in the schema because it may vary from cluster to cluster.

> This concept is whether a permission verb is "covered" by enclosing permissions,

Reviewer 6: I'm not in love with "covered" and "unconvered" as terms - are they standard concepts in authz realm?

If not, maybe we can solicit ideas for names.  e.g. Inherited vs Explicit or something

or whether it is "uncovered". If a users tries to make a change, and one of the
fields changing has a permission verb which is "uncovered", the user must have
that permission in order to make the change, it's no longer good enough to have
the general update permission or even an enclosing permission (like permission
to modify metadata).

To support this, we will add a new resource to the system. Each object will
contain a list of permissions to mark as "uncovered". We support multiple
objects to make it easy for us to add some default object(s) in the future, and
to let cluster admins mark certain permissions as uncovered in their particular
cluster.

The k8s project can probably only permit brand new fields to have "uncovered"
permissions by default, otherwise we would break existing users. But cluster
admins know the exact authz system they use, and they can simultanesouly mark a
permission as "uncovered" while granting it via their authz system, so that
there is no outage.

Example:

```

> apiVersion: permissionconfig.k8s.io/v1

Reviewer 6: IMHO "config" adds no value in this string.

kind: UncoveredPermissionSet
metadata:
  name: legacySensitiveLabels
spec:
  uncoveredPermissions:
  - "granular:label(pod-security.kubernetes.io)" # for the enforce label
  - "granular:label(scheduler.alpha.kubernetes.io)" # for the node-selector label
```

#### API Server Additional Plumbing and Checks

Currently apiserver performs the authz check before descending into any detailed
logic for mutating operations. This means that when it is doing the authz check,
it knows the *object* that is being changed, but nothing about *which fields*
are changing.

We will introduce a new permission, "granular". This permission
means that although the caller doesn't have generic update permissions, it may
still change some fields if it has the specific permissions required.

API Server already maintains schema information for all resource types. This
will be watched to also maintain field <-> permission mappings.

API Server will be modified to watch UncoveredPermissionSets, to keep a map in
memory of these.

Now we can describe the modifications to API Server:

On any mutating call,

> 1. Check the "PUT" / "PATCH" / "CREATE" permission. If the actor has this,

Reviewer 7: nit: permissions should be `"updated" / "patch" / "create"`

   place a marker=regular in the request context and proceed to step 3.

> 2. Otherwise, check the "granular" permission. If yes, place a

Reviewer 7: Does a `granular` check make sense in the context of a create? It seems reasonable to me that it would only apply to update/patch requests.

Reviewer 4: You might let people make a Pod, provided they don't set `schedulingGates`, and then have exceptions - maybe one principal can set _this particular `schedulingGate`_ but not an arbitrary one.

Similar idea to setting a finalizer at create time. If we want to have fine grained control, I think it could be frustrating to have to duplicate the logic / whatever so that we restrict both creates and updates.

Author: Yeah the intention is that the per-field permissions are the same for both, otherwise I have to duplicate this all to handle both paths.

The result is you won't be able to create things if you lack a granular permission on a required, non-defaulted field.

Reviewer 6: Does this check apply before or after static defaults?

Author: I think after? And probably some extra work not described in the KEP needs to be done to make it work like I just said.

I hope to make another pass on this KEP soon

Reviewer 6: So if a field needs an uncovered permission, it *cannot* have a default value (or it has to be defaulted in registry, not static) - is that the right implication?

This design is written to have no impact on existing cluster users for existing
fields.

A risk is that it would be possible to configure permissions which result in a
large number of authz checks. Specifically CRD authors could craft a CRD with
many checks required to do anything.

A runtime risk is an actor with the "granular" permission could make requests
changing many fields it doesn't have permission for, with the aim of driving
many authz checks to overload the authz system. To mitigate this we (a) have the
"granular" permission at all, to reduce the number of actors that could attempt
this, and (b) we will not check all special permissions for a request once we
know at least one has failed.

## Design Details

### Permission Description System

Now that we have described all requirements and given the overall outline, we
can finally state exactly how the mapping from field to permission works and how
it is specified. Additionally, we will describe the parameterization systems. We
will give a series of examples in {goal, built-in specification, CRD
specification, resulting verb} tuplets.

##### Everything in spec

> On types:

Reviewer 6: Why both?  Every type is linked from some field and we know that (sadly) we sometimes reuse types.  Is there a driving case where defining it by type is the best solution?

```go
// +permission-verb:"specification"
type FooSpec struct {
```

Or on fields:

```go
  ...
  // +permission-verb:"specification"
  Spec FooSpec
  ...
```

On CRDs schemas:

```
"x-kubernetes-permission-verb": "specification"
```

The authz system will see the verb "granular:specfication".

This illustrates that the granular permissions can be made hirearchical;
granting "granular" and "granular:specification" to some actor permits it to
modify anything in .spec. API Server will check the permissions from most
general to most specific, so that a single general permission can let it avoid
checking many specific permissions.

#### Pod's nodeName

Given where this appears in Pod, this permission will only be checked for pods

> if the agent doesn't have the "specification" permission.

Reviewer 6: If they have PATCH/PUT it is also satisifed, right?  Because this is a convered permission?

This must be set on the field declaration, since nodeName is a string and not a
struct:

```go
  ...

>   // +permission-verb:"nodeAssignment"

Reviewer 6: curiously, all your "verbs" are nouns - is it worth keeping the word "verb" in this?  e.g `+permission:"nodeAssignment"` is just as clear.    Or `+permission-verb:"assignNode"` ?

  NodeName string
  ...
```

On CRDs schemas (pod is not a CRD, but if a CRD has a field that is the same
concept, you could add to that field this):

```
"x-kubernetes-permission-verb": "nodeAssignment"
```

The authz system will see the verb "granular:nodeAssignment".

##### Everything in metadata

Configured the same as everything in spec, but the verb will be (CHOICE NEEDED)

> "metadata" or "objectmeta".

Reviewer 6: FWIW "metadata" is my pref

	// +optional
	Labels map[string]string `json:"labels,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,11,rep,name=labels"`
	...
```

This is very inconvenient as it leaves only one place to declare things in the
schema. Note that we must not make any incompatible changes to the serialization
of this type. This is one way to make this work:

```go
	...
	Labels map[LabelKey]LabelValue `json:"labels,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,11,rep,name=labels"`
	...
}
.
.
.

// LabelKey is a key for a label; it is a string.
// +permission-parameter-source:"label-key"
type LabelKey string

// LabelValue is a value in a label; it is a string.
// +permission-verb:"label"
// +permission-parameterized-by:"label-key"
// +permission-parameter-treatment:slash-delimited-prefix
type LabelValue string
```

This says to the permission system that in order to change a LabelValue, there
must be something in the field path emitting a "label-key" parameter; that that
value needs to be massaged by a "slash-delimited-prefix" function; and that the
permission should then be checked with that parameter.

Supposing the key is "mycompany.example.com/FooLabel", The authz system will see
the verb "granular:label(mycompany.example.com)".

> DECISION NEEDED: would it be better to use a CEL expression to process the
> parameter?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<<[UNRESOLVED decision needed]>>
Would it be better to use a CEL expression to process the parameter?
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

#### Specific Finalizers

TODO (similar choice).

#### Specific Conditions

TODO (similar choice).

#### Complete List of parameter treatments

* None (omit the tag completely). The referenced field is used verbatim as the parameter.
* `slash-delimited-prefix`. The referenced field is split by '/' characters and
  the first segment is used as the parameter.
* (in progress)

#### Style Guide / Consistency Help

Rules for making up a permission:

* The permission name SHOULD be a noun.
* The permission name MUST be in lowerCamelCase.
* The permission name SHOULD refer to a conceptual attribute, not a field name.
  This helps the permission be reusable in other contexts with different
  enclosing parent fields.
* The permission MUST NOT reference ancestor fields ("nodeAssigment" not
  "pod.nodeAssignment")

We will update the documentation generation to list the permissions both with
the fields / types they guard, as well as in a standalone list for easy
browsing. This list will help API reviewers keep the permissions on built-in
resources coherent.

DECISION NEEDED:

> Option A: we will put a registry file in the kubernetes repository so that 3rd

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3787 ?

> DECISION NEEDED:
> 
> Option A: we will put a registry file in the kubernetes repository so that 3rd
> party extension authors can register their custom permissions and dedup/reuse
> rather than create new ones, if possible.
> 
> Option B: we will require 3rd party authors to prefix their custom permissions
> with the string "ext" (TODO: "mycompany.example.com" if there is likely to be
> space).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<<[UNRESOLVED decision needed]>>
Option A: we will put a registry file in the k/kubernetes repository so that 3rd
party extension authors can register their custom permissions and dedup/reuse
rather than create new ones, if possible.

Option B: we will require 3rd party authors to prefix their custom permissions
with the string "ext" (TODO: "mycompany.example.com" if there is likely to be
space).
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

My option C would be to copy the idea from labels and use `kubernetes.io/whatever` for permissions defined by Kubernetes. Prefixes need to be valid DNS subdomains and should be associated with the party that defines them. Etc.
